Frankenstein:
Frankenstein is a physics-based programme that uses predictions of protein structure generated by the ESMFold API and improves upon their stability using physics-based methods. It uses a 2-stage pipeline to do this; the first involves more basic techniques such as thermal relaxation and annealing; the second involves 24 rounds of computationally intensive meta-dynamics (interleaved with thermal relaxation), which allows for more drastic improvements in protein energy.
The main protein this was tested on was a 21-residue capsid spike domain protein (7UZT), whose energy was improved successfully from its original ESMFold baseline of X (likely due to atom overlap), to approximately -21kJ/mol/res after the first stage, to approximately -30kJ/mol/res after the second stage.

The problem:
AI models such as AlphaFold use statistics and evolutionary history to predict protein structures from their sequences, not physics. Although AlphaFold has made significant strides in our ability to make these predictions, its outputs are often problematic due to:
Steric Clashes: Atoms overlapping in physically impossible ways.
Local Minima: The protein is "folded" but not in its most thermodynamically stable state.
High Potential Energy: Leading to instability in downstream simulation or docking tasks.
I was inspired by the hybrid models adopted by teams working in the AIMO where AI is harnessed in combination with hard programming to allow AI to excel in mathematical performance. The thought then occurred to me of why we can’t use a similar hybrid method when it comes to predicting protein structures.

The solution:
Frankenstein runs a 2-stage improvement process (excluding the “engineer”, which simply calls ESMFold to produce a baseline structure for us). Extreme energies and instabilities are mostly dealt with by the first stage where thermal relaxation and annealing take place. The second stage (The “Advanced Physics Agent” called by “Frankenstein”) enables 24 rounds of meta-dynamics, where lower-energy structures are found by spawning 8 “workers”, whose job it is to apply energy pulses for short bursts of time to different sections of the protein. This has been designed to mimic the role of cellular ATP (which assists with correct protein folding) as closely as computationally feasible.

Improvements for 7UZT test-run:
Energy Density:	-19.85 kJ/mol/res	-> -29.23 kJ/mol/res	(~47% Increase in Stability)
Steric Clashes:	Present ->	Resolved
The pipeline successfully navigated the energy landscape, escaping multiple local minima where standard relaxation failed.

Key features include: GPU parallelisation support; agent logic allows different energies to be applied, and a cyclical worker to apply sequential energies to different sections of the protein; “smart-braking”, where energy is measured after each time-step/energy burst and workers are stopped when lower energy configurations are found (saving computational power and preventing over-correction); physics guardrails to prevent

Tech Stack
Simulation Engine: OpenMM (CUDA/OpenCL)
Structure Preparation: PDBFixer (Topology correction)
Bioinformatics: Biopython (PDB parsing, sequence analysis)
AI Folding: ESMFold API (Initial structure generation)

Installations:
pip install numpy biopython
pip install openmm
pip install pdbfixer
Installation via conda is recommended
Usage:
To run in Pycharm apply the following steps: Paste Block 1 (without %%writefile); delete the line from simulation_engine import ... from Block 2; paste Block 2 immediately after Block 1; this creates one massive file that works instantly when pasted.
Note: to run in Jupyter the code needs to be split into 2 blocks, which are run separately.

Disclaimer:
This tool is a research prototype; while it significantly improves thermodynamic stability (AMBER99SB-ILDN), final structures may be incorrect and must be validated against experimental evidence.
